- Atoms -> Molecules -> Cells -> Tissues -> Organs > Organ systems -> Organisms -> Populations -> Communities -> The biosphere
---
##### Atoms and Elements
-  An atoms is a basic unit of matter.
-  Any material that is composed of only one type of atom is called a chemical element.
-  Elements consist of only one kind of atom and connot be decomposed into simpler substances.
---
##### Molecules and Compounds
- A molecule is an electrically neutral group of two or more atoms held together by chemical bonds.
- Homonuclear molecules: Consists of atoms of one chemical element. Ex: (O<sub>2</sub>)
- Heteronuclear molecules: More than one element. Ex: (H<sub>2</sub>O)
- Compounds are formed by two or more different elements, so molecules that contain only one kind of element are not considered compounds. Ex: Sodium chloride (NaCl)
---
##### Cells
- Smallest unit of life that is classified as a living thing.
- The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and sometimes called the "building block of life".
- Made up of many different kinds of molecules.
---
##### Tissues
- An assembly of cells. Not necessarily identical. Together, they carry out a specific function.
- 4 basic types of tissues:
	- Epithelial tissue
	- Muscular tissue
	- Nervous tissue
	- Connective tissues
- Example:
	-	Muscle tissues: smooth muscle, skeletal muscle, and cardiac muscle.
	-	Nervous tissues: the brain, cranial nerves and spinal cord and, peripheral nerves and motor neurons.
---
##### Organs
- An organ is composed of two or more tissues working together to perform specific functions
- Almost every organ in human body consist of all 4 types of basic tissues (See above)
- Example: The stomach
---
##### Organ Systems
- A group of organs that perform a specific function.
- Ex. The digestive system 
	- mouth
	- esophagus 
	- stomach
	- small intestine
	- large intestine.....
---
##### Organisms
- Independent living unit – an individual
- Vary in size and complexity
	- Unicellular organisms: a single cell carries out all the functions of life (ex. bacteria)
	- Multicellular organisms: made of many cells that are specialized for different functions
- Biologists classify organisms as belonging to a particular species, which is a related group of organisms that share a distinctive form and set of attributes in nature.
- The members of the same species are closely related genetically.
---
##### Ecological Organization
- Populations: A group of organisms of the same species that occupy the same environment
- Communities: A biological community is an assemblage of populations of different species.
	- The types of species found in a community are determined by the environment and by the interactions of species with each other.
- Ecosystems: The community of organisms present in a particular type of area and their interactions with the physical surroundings
- The Biosphere is the part of the earth, including air, land, surface rocks, and water, within which life occurs (basically all of earth’s ecosystems together)
- All parts of the earth inhabited with living organisms