- Each organism interacts with its environment, which includes other organisms as well as nonliving factors.
- The dynamics of any ecosystem include two major processes:
	- The cycling of nutrients (Ex: [The Water Cycle](https://www.google.com/search?q=the+water+cycle&hl=en&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwi-vdCO2aLzAhXjmeAKHWJoC9IQ_AUoAXoECAEQAw&biw=1280&bih=601&dpr=2))
	- The flow of energy from sunlight to producers to consumers.
- In most ecosystems, producers are plants and other photosynthetic organisms that convert light energy to chemical energy.
- Consumers are organisms that feed on producers and other consumers.
---
- Energy exchange between an organism and environment often involves energy transformations (i.e. solar energy to chemical energy)
- In transformations, some energy is lost as heat
- According to the first law of thermodynamics, the energy of the universe is constant.
	- Energy can be transferred and transformed.
	- Energy cannot be created or destroyed.
- Three types of organisms involve in the flow of energy:
	- ==Producers==: produce their own food from simple raw materials.
		- Autotrophs. 
		- Example: Plants, algae (use sunlight as energy form)
	- ==Consumers==: depend on producers for food.
		- Heterotrophs.
		- Obtain energy by breaking down food originally produced by producers.
	-  ==Decomposers (Saprotrophs)==:
		-  Heterotrophs that obtain their energy by breaking down dead organic matter
		-  Example: bacteria, fungi, worms
			-  Play an important role in recycling nutrients.
			-  They recycle dead plants and animals into chemical nutrients like carbon and nitrogen that are released back into the soil, air and water.