- Two main types of scientific inquiry:
	1. Discovery Science
	2. Hypothesis-Based Science
---
##### Discovery Science
- Discovery science (a.k.a. descriptive science) is mostly about discovering nature.
- Describes nature through careful observation and collection and analysis of data without the need for a preconceived hypothesis or notion of what will be found.
- Goal is to gather information
- Discovery science often leads to hypothesis testing
---
##### Hypothesis-Based Science
- Observations and inductive reasoning can lead us to ask questions and propose hypothetical explanations called hypotheses
- A hypothesis is a formal proposed explanation for a natural phenomenon. "Hypothesis" - this word basically means a possible solution to a problem
- A hypothesis requires more work by researchers, i.e. lab experiments, to either accept or reject it.
- A scientific hypothesis leads to predictions that can be tested by observation or experimentation
- A prediction is basically an attempt to "guess"
---
- A scientific hypothesis must be testable
- One of the toughest parts of the Scientific Method is simply determining whether it's possible to design an experiment to test your hypothesis.
- For example, if a scientist asks, “If the earth had no moon all life on earth would die."
- This can never be science because it is a hypothesis that cannot be tested since there is no way of removing the moon from earths orbit their is no way to test the hypotheses.
---
- Formalized Hypotheses Contain Two Variables.
- One is "==independent==" and the other is "==dependent==." 
- The independent variable is also called an experimental variable. It is the variable being manipulated in the experiment in order to show the effect on the dependent variable
- The dependent variable is also called the response variable. It is the variable being observed in the experiment. Generally speaking, the tester has no control over this one!
- In an experiment, the researcher is looking for the possible effect on the dependent variable that might be caused by changing the independent variable.
---
##### How To Formulate A Formal Hypothesis
1. State the problem that you are trying to solve.
2. Write the hypothesis as an “ifthen” statement.
	-	If a specific action is taken, then a certain outcome is expected.
3. Define the variables
- Independent variables are the ones which are manipulated, controlled, or changed. Independent variables are isolated from other factors of the study.
- Dependent variables, as name suggests are dependent on other factors of the study. They are influenced by the change in independent variable.
- Example:
	- If skin cancer is related to ultraviolet light , then people with a high exposure to UV light will have a higher frequency of skin cancer.
	- If leaf color change is related to temperature , then exposing plants to low temperatures will result in changes in leaf color.
---
##### The Null Hypothesis (HO) and The Alternate Hypothesis (HA)
- In every hypothesis test we need to state a Null Hypothesis (HO) and Alternate hypothesis (HA)
- The null hypothesis (H0) is the hypothesis that states there is no statistical difference between two sample sets.
	- Basically, it assumes the independent variable does not have an effect on the dependent variable in a scientific experiment.
- Example:
	- Null: If Kentucky Bluegrass (Poa pratensis) is exposed to carbonated water, then there will be no difference in growth response compared to water.
- A null hypothesis is assumed to be true until shown to be improbable when it is rejected in favor of the only alternative
- If you are successful in rejecting the null hypothesis, you can conclude that the data supports the alternative hypothesis.
- More example:
	- Null Hypothesis: “If CEGEP students eat omega-3 fish oil supplements for six months, then they will show no higher Biology NYA test score than CEGEP students who have not.”
	- Alternative Hypothesis: “If CEGEP students eat omega-3 fish oil supplements for six months, then there will be a significant higher Biology NYA test score than CEGEP students who have not.”
---
##### Theories
- It is a broad explanation of some aspect of the natural world that is substantiated by a large body of evidence
	- For example, the theory of evolution applies to all living things and is based on wide range of observations.
- The creation of theories, in turn, fuels more hypotheses, data collection, and refutation or support for the theory.
- A theory can only be weakened and eventually replaced by the accumulation of a body of evidence that contradicts the theories explanation of observations, and the formulation of a new theory that provides a more adequate explanation.
---
##### The Scientific Method: Ordered Steps
1. Observe: look at results of others (literature) or from your own previous experiments.
2. Form a hypothesis: statement that can be tested.
3. Make a prediction (based on the hypothesis).
4. Test prediction:
	- Plan experiments (include controls) 
	- Perform experiments 
	- Collect new data & analyze
5. Interpret data: Ask: do results support or fail to support your hypothesis ?
6. Draw conclusions.
---
##### Example: Flashlight
- Observations: camping - flash light does not work Question: What’s wrong with the flashlight?
- Hypothesis: Batteries are dead
- Prediction: if hypothesis is correct, then changing batteries should make it work
- Experiment: change batteries (must test hypothesis)
- Result: 
	- Works  -> support hypothesis
	- Doesn’t work  -> new hypothesis -> change bulb?
- ==Data Only Supports the Hypothesis, Never Proves It!==
- For example, you replace your flashlight bulb, and it now works; this supports the hypothesis that your bulb was burnt out, but does not prove it . Perhaps the first bulb was inserted incorrectly
- At the end of the experiment: never say the hypothesis is 100% absolute (can never be proven true) only that the data obtained supports the hypothesis.
---
##### More example
Experiment 1
- Null: If Kentucky Bluegrass (Poa pratensis) is exposed to carbonated water, then there will be no difference in growth response compared to water.
- Alternative:If Kentucky Bluegrass (Poa pratensis) is exposed to carbonated water, then there will be a significant difference in growth response compared to water.

Experiment 2 
- Hypothesis: If the nucleus is required for well-being of cell, then removing the nucleus will cause significant harm to the well being of the cell
- Prediction: if remove nucleus, cell will die
- Experiment: remove nucleus from amoeba (unicellular organism)
- Result: amoeba died
- Conclusion: nucleus needed for survival OR is it ?
---
##### Use a Control Group
- The experimental and control groups differ only in the one variable the experiment is designed to test 
	- The variable manipulated is the independent variable
	- Ideally, only the variable of interest differs between the control and experimental groups
- Control Group for Example 1
	-	Only water is giving to a similar group of Kentucky Bluegrass
-	Control Group for Example 2
	- micro-loop inserted, but keep nucleus
	- Result: amoebas died only when nucleus was removed. Amoebas in control group survived.
	- Conclude: Nucleus needed for survival.
--- 
##### Factors to Consider when Planning an Experiment
- Sample size
	- The larger the sample size, the more accurate the results.
- Avoid bias
	- Double-blind study: neither patient nor physician (evaluator) know who is in the experimental group (got the drug) and who is in the control group (got the placebo).
- Placebo effect
	- People report various changes or improvements even though they were given a placebo.
	- Due to the person’s expectation or belief that the treatment will bring about an improvement.
- Reproducibility
	- Experiments should be repeatable by others if they were designed & performed correctly.
---
##### Scientific Ethics!
- Cannot change/alter data!!
- Data can support or not support hypothesis
- Experiments are reproducible
- Care when working with live animals
